feat: support operation hooks (#4730)
strongloop/loopback-next: docs/site/migration/models/operation-hooks.md

permalink: /doc/en/lb4/migration-models-operation-hooks.html
---

> Operation hooks are not supported in LoopBack 4 yet. It will be, eventually; you

Reviewer: Are we really going to have operation hooks in LB4? Maybe reword it as:
`See the [Operation hooks for models/repositories spike](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/issues/1919) for the progress`

Author: Updated as per suggestion.

[Operation hooks for models/repositories spike](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/issues/1919)
to follow the progress made on this subject.

In the meantime, we are providing a temporary API for enabling Operation hooks
in LoopBack 4: override `DefaultCrudRepository`'s `definePersistedModel` method
in the model's repository.

The `definePersistedModel` method of `DefaultCrudRepository` returns a model
instance on which you can apply the
[LoopBack 3 operation hooks](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb3/Operation-hooks.html).
Make sure to return the model instance from the derived class.

Here is an example of a repository implementing `definePersistedModel` and

> applying an operation hook on a model instance:

Reviewer 2: nitpick: I remember the `observe` method is called by a model class, not instance, not sure is if it's still the case in the legacy juggler bridge.

Author: Thanks! Corrected.

```ts
class ProductRepository extends DefaultCrudRepository<
  Product,
  typeof Product.prototype.id,
  ProductRelations
> {
  constructor(dataSource: juggler.DataSource) {
    super(Product, dataSource);
  }

  definePersistedModel(entityClass: typeof Product) {
    const model = super.definePersistedModel(entityClass);

>     model.observe('before save', async ctx => {

Reviewer 3: We can access the model as `this.modelClass`. Why not leveraging that to set up observers instead of overriding `definedPersistedModel`?

Author: Initially we were considering having an `observe` method on `DefaultCrudRepository`, which would call `this.modelClass.observe`. After some brainstorming, @bajtos suggested the possible problems with `observe` is not worth it. Eg: calling `observe()` multiple times and how to handle it. He had suggested another approach but it wasn't very DX-friendly, so we settled on the current one.

"You want to directly access the model? Then you will have to override the `definePersistedModel ` method."

Reviewer 4: @raymondfeng please check the description of the user story and the discussion in that GH issue for more context.

@hacksparrow please update PR description with a reference to the GH issue this is related to.

Reviewer 3: @hacksparrow We do support multiple observers for a given model class/operation - see https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-datasource-juggler/blob/master/lib/observer.js#L51

Author: Yes, that's understood. We were wondering how should LB4 respond when an operation hook is installed multiple times: a. Throw an error? b. Accept silently - how does the user know what happened?

Also, it is not impossible to call the `observe` method before the `modelClass` is defined. What happens in that case?

Since this is a temporary workaround, we didn't want to invest too much time handling various possible scenarios, edge cases etc. We can do that when we investigate the use of interceptor for the "real" implementation.

to follow the progress made on this subject.

In the meantime, we are providing a temporary API for enabling Operation hooks
in LoopBack 4: override `DefaultCrudRepository`'s `definePersistedModel` method
in the model's repository.

The `definePersistedModel` method of `DefaultCrudRepository` returns a model
class on which you can apply the
[LoopBack 3 operation hooks](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb3/Operation-hooks.html).
Make sure to return the model class from your repository's
`definePersistedModel` method.

Here is an example of a repository implementing `definePersistedModel` and
applying an operation hook on a model:

```ts
class ProductRepository extends DefaultCrudRepository<
  Product,
  typeof Product.prototype.id,
  ProductRelations
> {
  constructor(dataSource: juggler.DataSource) {
    super(Product, dataSource);
  }

  definePersistedModel(entityClass: typeof Product) {
    const modelClass = super.definePersistedModel(entityClass);
    modelClass.observe('before save', async ctx => {
      console.log(`going to save ${ctx.Model.modelName}`);
    });
    return modelClass;
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: Please explain the problem of multiple registration of the same hook and how we are avoiding it by registering the hooks inside `definePersistedModel` method.

Author: Done

in LoopBack 4: override `DefaultCrudRepository`'s `definePersistedModel` method
in the model's repository.

The `definePersistedModel` method of `DefaultCrudRepository` returns a model
class on which you can apply the
[LoopBack 3 operation hooks](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb3/Operation-hooks.html).
Make sure to return the model class from your repository's
`definePersistedModel` method.

Here is an example of a repository implementing `definePersistedModel` and
applying an operation hook on a model:

```ts
class ProductRepository extends DefaultCrudRepository<
  Product,
  typeof Product.prototype.id,
  ProductRelations
> {
  constructor(dataSource: juggler.DataSource) {
    super(Product, dataSource);
  }

  definePersistedModel(entityClass: typeof Product) {
    const modelClass = super.definePersistedModel(entityClass);
    modelClass.observe('before save', async ctx => {
      console.log(`going to save ${ctx.Model.modelName}`);
    });
    return modelClass;
  }
}
```

Although possible, we are not providing an API which directly exposes the
`observe` method of the model class. The current API makes the registration of

> operation hooks a process that is possible only after the model class is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
operation hooks a process that is possible only at the time when the model class is
```

Author: 👍
